Project Overview: Hospital Management System


---

Purpose

The Hospital Management System is designed to streamline and manage the daily operations of a hospital or healthcare facility. This system eliminates manual work by automating various processes such as patient registration, appointment scheduling, electronic health records (EHR) management, billing, inventory tracking, and staff management. It enhances efficiency, reduces errors, and ensures a better patient experience.


---

Features

1. Patient Registration

Add new patients to the system with their personal and medical details.

Retrieve and update patient information.



2. Appointment Scheduling

Schedule, view, and manage patient appointments with doctors.

Prevent appointment conflicts through a centralized system.



3. Electronic Health Records (EHR)

Maintain and access patients' medical histories.

Store diagnosis, treatment plans, and prescriptions securely.



4. Billing and Invoicing

Generate invoices for medical services and procedures.

Manage payment records and track outstanding balances.



5. Inventory Management

Track medical supplies and equipment.

Get alerts for low-stock items to ensure uninterrupted services.



6. Staff Management

Maintain records of hospital staff, including doctors, nurses, and administrative employees.

Assign shifts and track performance.





---

How to Run It

Prerequisites:

1. Install Java Development Kit (JDK) (Version 8 or above).


2. Install a Java IDE like IntelliJ IDEA, Eclipse, or VS Code (optional but recommended).


3. Git (if cloning from GitHub).




---

Steps to Run the Project:

1. Clone the Repository (if hosted on GitHub):

git clone https://github.com/username/HospitalManagementSystem.git

Navigate to the project directory:

cd HospitalManagementSystem


2. Compile the Code: If using the terminal, navigate to the src directory:

javac Main.java


3. Run the Application: Execute the compiled Java program:

java Main


4. Using an IDE:

Open the project in your preferred Java IDE.

Navigate to the Main.java file.

Right-click and select Run or use the IDE's run button.





---

Future Enhancements

Integrate a database (e.g., MySQL or PostgreSQL) for persistent data storage.

Add authentication and role-based access for security.

Implement a web-based or mobile-based user interface for broader accessibility.

Add reporting tools to analyze hospital operations.



---